Adapter interface (#104)
openclimatedata/openscm: docs/development.rst

    :start-after: sec-begin-development
    :end-before: sec-end-development

.. _writing-adapters:

Writing a model adapter
=======================

Creating an :class:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter` subclass
******************************************************

- Create your adapter source file in ``openscm/adapters/``, e.g.
  ``myadapter.py``

- If your adapter needs additional dependencies add them to the
  ``requirements_extras`` dictionary in ``setup.py`` (see comment
  there).

- Subclass the :class:`openscm.adapter.Adapter` class:

  .. code:: python

      from ..adapter import Adapter

      class MyAdapter(Adapter):

- Implement the relevant methods (or just do ``pass`` if you do not
  need to do anything in the particular method). An adapter should not

>   use parts of OpenSCM other than ``ParameterSet``.

Reviewer: To check I understand, the adapter only ever communicates with ParameterSet? Either as a place to retrieve input from, or a place to write output to?

Author: yes

Author: How would you make that clearer in the docs here?

Reviewer: 'The only part of OpenSCM with which Adapters should interact is ``ParameterSet``.'

  - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter._initialize_model` method
    initializes the adapter and is called only once. It should set the
    default values of mandatory *model-specific* (not :ref:`standard
    OpenSCM parameters <standard-parameters>`!) parameters in the
    :class:`~openscm.core.ParameterSet`. Their :ref:`hierarchical
    names <parameter-hierarchy>` should start with the model/adapter
    name.

    .. code:: python

>         def _initialize_model(self) -> None:

Reviewer: This needs to take arguments as how some models initialise varies depending on how you want to use them (see e.g. the `root_dir` argument to the `MAGICCBase` class in Pymagicc). Unless you want `__init__` to take arguments instead?

Author: > Why is this private? Cause it should only ever be called by `Core` and not by the user directly?

I wanted to have everything the (dev) user implements be protected so we can later wrap these methods in the `Adapter` base class (e.g., as for `step`). The (end) user never calls the adapter, only ``Core``.

> Somewhere in there, the user needs to be able to pass arguments to an initialisation step as how some models initialise varies depending on how you want to use them (see e.g. the `root_dir` argument to the `MAGICCBase` class in Pymagicc). Those arguments could be passed here or in `__init__` instead?

Hmm, maybe I here cling to a language-independent interface too much. For that, we would require all such parameters be set in ``ParameterSet`` (the “model-specific parameters” in the doc). Maybe then postpone the ``_initialize_model`` till the first initialization of a run?

Reviewer: > maybe I here cling to a language-independent interface too much

Maybe, no idea. 

> Maybe then postpone the `_initialize_model` till the first initialization of a run?

Can do that too. 

> For that, we would require all such parameters be set in `ParameterSet`

Ok then we would need a new parameter type, string (or I would actually lean to generic where people can put whatever random crap they need to get their model to run) to pass stuff like `run_dir` (which could be e.g. a path pointing to where your executable is).

Author: see #124

            # TODO Initialize the model
            # TODO Set default parameter values:
            self._parameters.get_writable_scalar_view(
                ("MyModel", "Specific Parameter"), ("World",), "Unit"
            ).set(DEFAULT_VALUE)

  - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter._initialize_run_parameters`
    method initializes a particular run. It is called before the
    adapter is used in any way and at most once before a call to
    :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.run` or
    :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.step`.

    .. code:: python

        def _initialize_run_parameters(self) -> None:
            """
            TODO Initialize run parameters by reading model parameters
            from `self._parameters` (see below).
            """

>     You should later use the start and stop time of the run using the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The adapter should later use the start and stop time of the run as given in the
```

    :attr:`self._start_time <openscm.adapter.Adapter._start_time>` and
    :attr:`self._stop_time <openscm.adapter.Adapter._stop_time>`
    attributes.

  - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter._initialize_model_input` method
    initializes the input and model parameters of a particular run. It
    is also called before the adapter is used in any way and at most
    once before a call to :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.run` or
    :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.step`.

    This and the
    :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter._initialize_run_parameters` method
    are separated for higher efficiency when doing ensemble runs for

>     models that have additional overhead for changing run parameters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    models that have additional overhead for changing drivers/scenario setup.
```

I can't think of the right words to use to make the distinction between scenario specific stuff (e.g. emissions) and run specific stuff (e.g. ECS). I'm not sure that 'run parameters' and 'model input' is very clear. @rgieseke @chrisroadmap how would you distinguish between stuff that changes every run and stuff the changes once every, say, 600 runs when doing an ensemble of runs?

Author: moved to #22

    .. code:: python

        def _initialize_model_input(self) -> None:
            """
            TODO Initialize model input by reading input parameters
            from ``self._parameters`` (see below).
            """

  - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter._reset` method resets the model
    to prepare for a new run. It is called once after each call of
    :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.run` and to reset the model after
    several calls to :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.step`.

    .. code:: python

        def _reset(self) -> None:
            # TODO Reset the model

  - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter._run` method runs the model
    over the full time range (as given by the times set by the
    previous call to
    :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter._initialize_run_parameters`). You

>     should at least implement this function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    
```

    <openscm.adapter.Adapter._current_time>`, which you should
    increase by the time step length and return its value. If your
    model does not support stepping just do ``raise
    NotImplementedError`` here.

    .. code:: python

        def _step(self) -> None:
            """
            TODO Do a single time step and write corresponding output
            parameters to ``self._parameters`` (see below).
            """
            self._current_time += YEAR

  - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter._shutdown` method cleans up the
    adapter.

    .. code:: python

        def _shutdown(self) -> None:
            # TODO Shut down model

Reading model and input parameters
**********************************

Model parameters and input data (referred to as general "parameters"
in OpenSCM) are **pulled** from the :func:`~openscm.core.ParameterSet`
provided by the OpenSCM Core. From this, you read the parameters in
the :ref:`time frame <timeframes>` and :ref:`unit <units>` as needed
by the specific model; conversion is done interally if possible.

OpenSCM defines a :ref:`set of standard parameters
<standard-parameters>` to be shared between different SCMs. You should

> use these where appropriate.

Reviewer: What does 'use these where appropriate' mean? When you can, write output to the standard set of OpenSCM parameters as well as to your model specific parameters?

Author: Yes, they should be used as input where they apply and as output where possible. I don’t know how to put that better...

Reviewer: How about 'As far as possible, adapters should be able to take all of them as input and should write their values to the output `ParameterSet`.'

Author: nice! I added a “Conversion of specific forms of these (aggregation, unit conversion, and time frame adjustment) is ensured by the `ParameterSet` class.”

Refer to the :ref:`low-level-interface` documentation on how to do so.

Writing output parameters
*************************

In the :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.run` and

> :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.step` function you should directly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.step` methods you should directly
```

write the relevant output parameters. Refer to the
:ref:`low-level-interface` documentation on how to do so.

Adding the adapter to the model registry
****************************************

Once ready, add a lookup for your adapter in
``openscm/adapters/__init__.py`` (where marked in the file) according
to:

.. code:: python

    elif name == "MyAdapter":

>         from .MyAdapter import MyAdapter

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        from .myadapter import MyAdapter
```

    :start-after: sec-begin-development
    :end-before: sec-end-development

.. _writing-adapters:

Writing a model adapter
=======================

Creating an :class:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter` subclass
******************************************************

- Create your adapter source file in ``openscm/adapters/``, e.g.
  ``MyAdapter.py``

> - Do not add additional dependencies to OpenSCM (such as in

Author: Sorry, forgot about that. What about making a target for each model?

> - Do not add additional dependencies to OpenSCM (such as in

Author: (then we could create a standard error message for missing dependencies just from the model name)

> - Do not add additional dependencies to OpenSCM (such as in

Reviewer: > What about making a target for each model?

Good idea

  ``setup.py``), but make sure that you throw an
  :class:`~openscm.errors.AdapterNeedsModuleError` when a module you
  depend on is not installed on the user's system (please include a
  message how to install the missing module):

  .. code:: python

      from ..errors import AdapterNeedsModuleError

      try:
          import MyExternalModule
      except ImportError:
          raise AdapterNeedsModuleError(
              """
              To run MyModel the 'MyExternalModule' is needed.
              Please install it using `pip install myexternalmodule`.
              """
          )

- Subclass the :class:`openscm.adapter.Adapter` class:

  .. code:: python

      from ..adapter import Adapter

      class MyAdapter(Adapter):

- Implement the relevant methods (you are not obliged to implement any
  method, but should at least implement the
  :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.run` function to do the actual model
  run. An adapter should ONLY interface with the :ref:`low-level API

>   <low-level-reference>`.

Author: Cool, will add such a test. Nevertheless, we should also mention what these tests test here.

  Make sure to always call the original implementation of each
  implemented method using ``super.FUNCTION_NAME(PARAMETERS)`` (see
  examples below). The implemented functions should NOT accept

>   additional parameters (e.g. using ``*args``/``**kwargs``).

Author: Hmm, I will restructure the class so the user only has to implement abstract methods.

>   additional parameters (e.g. using ``*args``/``**kwargs``).

Author: done

  - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.__init__` method initializes
    the adapter. It should set the default values of mandatory
    *model-specific* (not :ref:`standard OpenSCM parameters
    <standard-parameters>`!) parameters in the

>     :class:`~openscm.core.ParameterSet`. Their :ref:`hierarchical

Author: The idea here is to show the user which model-specific parameters exist including their default values.

    names <parameter-hierarchy>` should start with the model/adapter

>     name.

Author: The ParemeterSet is meant to be reused between runs for efficiency and preferably also between models (so a user later could just change the underlying model but use the same parameters. That's also why I wouldn't want to have the ParemeterSet as parameters for the initialization methods (see below).

    .. code:: python

        def __init__(self, parameters: ParameterSet):
            super.__init__(parameters)
            # TODO Initialize the model
            # TODO Set default parameter values:
            self._parameters.get_writable_scalar_view(
                ("MyModel", "Specific Parameter"), ("World",), "Unit"
            ).set(DEFAULT_VALUE)

>   - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.initialize_run_parameters`

Author: 1. Do we need an initialization function for the model itself apart from ``__init__``? Though we could use that for easier implementation without having to call the ``super.XX`` methods... Will think about that. Maybe having a separate ``shutdown`` method (apart from ``__del__``) would be more explicit?
2./3//4. I would prefer to have the same input ParameterSet (containing both input values and time series as well as model parameters) for different runs (that way ParameterViews can be reused and have only to be eestablished by ``__init__`` but read from in the other initialization functions). So, I would not have them as parameters here. Start and stop time would also be easier to know here already to properly handle the retreived time series, I suppose. Also, for stepwise running we need to know ``start_time`` and ``stop_time`` beforehand.

(Question aside: naming in american or british english?)

>   - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.initialize_run_parameters`

Author: @znicholls @rgieseke ?

>   - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.initialize_run_parameters`

Reviewer: >     * Do we need an initialization function for the model itself apart from `__init__`?

I don't think so. I've found it useful whilst playing around as I can then separate `adapter = MAGICC6()` and `adapter.initialise(root_dir="somewhere")` but I'm not sure it's actually a necessary separation long term.

>     * Maybe having a separate `shutdown` method (apart from `__del__`) would be more explicit?

I'm happy with whatever you decide here. Something to automatically mop up after a run would be nice (mainly for models which write a bunch of input/output to disc like MAGICC and HECTOR (?)).

> naming in american or british english?

Preference for british but don't mind

>     * I would prefer to have the same input ParameterSet (containing both input values and time series as well as model parameters) for different runs (that way ParameterViews can be reused and have only to be eestablished by `__init__` but read from in the other initialization functions). So, I would not have them as parameters here.

To check I've understood. On `__init__`, the adapter would return a `Core` with all the views established that the adapter understands. The user (coming from whatever level) uses the pre-initialised views to set start time and stop time and parameters and hence gets errors if they try to set anything which the adapter doesn't understand. Then the model just runs from `Core` (as it stands when `run` is called), returning a different `Core` instance with the results for that given run. If yes, that sounds genius.

>   - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.initialize_run_parameters`

Author: Ok, I have now moved all methods for the user to implement to abstract methods, so there are ``_initialize_model`` and ``_shutdown`` now.

> To check I've understood. On __init__, the adapter would return a Core with all the views established that the adapter understands.

The (now) ``_initialize_model`` method only fills the input parameter set. The ``Adapter`` class is only called from the ``Core`` class, but does not have anything to do with ``Core`` apart from that. The ``ParameterSet`` objects stay in the adapter. The adapter should not use views for non-model-specific parameters yet (I have to document that).

> The user (coming from whatever level) uses the pre-initialised views to set start time and stop time and parameters and hence gets errors if they try to set anything which the adapter doesn't understand.

The user uses the ``ParameterSet`` object (not the views, but these refer to that object) for all the parameters. They do not receive errors when setting parameters, only when the adapter pulls them, but for certain parameters expects them in a way that is impossible to convert. Parameters that the adapter doesn't understand (i.e. know about) would only remain unused (would implement a list of unused parameters the user can get).

> Then the model just runs from Core (as it stands when run is called), returning a different Core instance with the results for that given run. If yes, that sounds genius (I'm guessing the time penalty of creating views is zero as they're just views).

When the adapter is run (being called from ``Core``) it reads the new values from the (pre-instantiated) views and updates the output parameters via views (again). The user can use their views from the output parameter set to receive the (wanted) output.

>   - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.initialize_run_parameters`

Reviewer: > The `ParameterSet` objects stay in the adapter.

What does this mean? It's not passed back up to the user to then be able to fill out?

> The user uses the `ParameterSet` object

The one that stays in the adapter?

> only when the adapter pulls them

So every run, the adapter pulls every single parameter it knows about? Will this incur to large a processing cost if we only want to change one value?

> The user can use their views

Where are these views collated/collected/stored?

>   - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.initialize_run_parameters`

Author: > > The `ParameterSet` objects stay in the adapter.
> 
> What does this mean? It's not passed back up to the user to then be able to fill out?

Its main reference is ``Adapter._parameters`` so it kind of belongs to an adapter, but is passed to the end-user from the corresponding ``Core`` instance.

> > The user uses the `ParameterSet` object
> 
> The one that stays in the adapter?

Yes (see above)

> > only when the adapter pulls them
> 
> So every run, the adapter pulls every single parameter it knows about? Will this incur to large a processing cost if we only want to change one value?

If it keeps the view that should not be too much of an overhead, but could implement a ``_Parameter.version`` to check for new data. Alternatively, we could use callback functions for each view that are called each time the user changes data (though that seems a bit much, especially when you have a model that does bot cache the input parameters and where the adapter needs to get all input data again after a run, anyway....).

> > The user can use their views
> 
> Where are these views collated/collected/stored?

Up to the end-user ;) In the ``OpenSCM`` instance this would probably done in the background (have an idea about that interface that I will push to #118 in a week.

    :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.step`.

    This and the
    :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.initialize_run_parameters` method
    are separated for higher efficiency when doing ensemble runs for
    models that have additional overhead for changing run parameters.

    .. code:: python

        def initialize_model_input(self) -> None:
            super.initialize_model_input()
            """
            TODO Initialize model input by reading input parameters
            from ``self._parameters`` (see below).
            """

  - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.reset` method resets the model
    to prepare for a new run. It is called once after each call of
    :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.run` and to reset the model after
    several calls to :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.step`.

    .. code:: python

        def reset(self) -> None:
            super.reset()
            # TODO Reset the model

  - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.run` method runs the model
    over the full time range (as given by the times set by the
    previous call to
    :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.initialize_run_parameters`). You

>     should at least implement this function.

Author: I think we should do both.

            """
            TODO Run the model and write output parameters to
            `self._parameters` (see below).
            """

  - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.step` method does a single
    time step. You can get the current time from
    :attr:`self._current_time
    <openscm.adapter.Adapter._current_time>`, which you should
    increase by the time step length and return its value.

    .. code:: python

        def step(self) -> int:
            # Do not call ``super.step()`` as we override this method
            """
            TODO Do a single time step and write corresponding output
            parameters to ``self._parameters`` (see below).
            """
            self._current_time += YEAR
            return self._current_time

  - The :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.__del__` method cleans up the
    adapter. If you need to shutdown the model, please implement this
    method.

    .. code:: python

        def __del__(self):
            # TODO Shut down model

Reading model and input parameters
**********************************

Model parameters and input data (referred to as general "parameters"

> in OpenSCM) are **pulled** from the :func:`~openscm.core.ParameterSet`

Author: Ideally the user would not need to care about the particular handling of the parameters for a particular model. Only the specific adapter knows what is needed. Thus, the adapter needs to pull the data (and handle defaults for data that is not set).
Warnings would be good though for parameters that are unused or used differnently than expected. What about a method retrieving a list of all used/unused parameters?

> in OpenSCM) are **pulled** from the :func:`~openscm.core.ParameterSet`

Reviewer: > What about a method retrieving a list of all used/unused parameters?

Sounds wise. Might also be solved as I suspect I have only just understood how you envisage this working (see above).

> in OpenSCM) are **pulled** from the :func:`~openscm.core.ParameterSet`

Author: Will do in a new PR, issue #123

provided by the OpenSCM Core. From this, you read the parameters in
the :ref:`time frame <timeframes>` and :ref:`unit <units>` as needed
by the specific model; conversion is done interally if possible.

OpenSCM defines a :ref:`set of standard parameters
<standard-parameters>` to be shared between different SCMs. You should
use these where appropriate.

Refer to the :ref:`low-level-interface` documentation on how to do so.

Writing output parameters
*************************

In the :func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.run` and
:func:`~openscm.adapter.Adapter.step` function you should directly

> write the relevant output parameters. Refer to the

Author: The output parameters should be written to a ParameterSet. Should we use the same as for input or have a separate one?

> write the relevant output parameters. Refer to the

Author: @znicholls @rgieseke ?

> write the relevant output parameters. Refer to the

Reviewer: > Should we use the same as for input or have a separate one?

Separate I think to avoid overwriting (sometimes parameters get changed/used internally in cryptic ways by the model *cough*MAGICC and HECTOR*cough*) and to make debugging easier. See comment above

> write the relevant output parameters. Refer to the

Author: all right ;)
